Filters help users tailor product lists,
but what happens when they lose track of
which filters are applied?
Testing shows that when filters aren't
clearly visible, users can feel confused
and frustrated. Let's explore how to fix
this.
Hi, I'm Christian Holst, co-founder of
Baymard Institute, and today I'm
presenting guideline number 2 572
of Baymard's large-scale usability test
findings, display applied filters on
mobile in an overview.
When applied filters are shown only in
the original filter location, users are
faced with two issues.
Without a clear display of applied
filters, users must revisit the
filtering interface to confirm their
choices, often scrolling through and
memorizing selected filters before
returning to the results.
For instance, at both Williams-Sonoma
and Walmart, users have to reopen the
filter interface just to see which
filters they've applied.
At Hamleys,
users who apply multiple filters and
scroll through results can easily lose
track of how narrow their list has
become.
When that happens, they may assume there
are no suitable products.
While the filtering interface shows an
overview of active filters, it doesn't
help once they've returned to the
product list.
Although six filters are applied to this
Nike product list, there's no direct
indication on the list itself. As a
result, users who forget which filters
are active must return to the filtering
interface to see or remove them.
Removing applied filters becomes more
difficult if users must return to where
they originally selected each filter. On
Amazon, for example, the filtering
interface closes after one filter is
deselected, forcing users to reopen it
repeatedly when removing multiple
filters.
To help users apply and remove filters
more easily, provide an applied filters
overview above the mobile product list
or search results.
This allows them to confirm which
filters are active and understand the
scope of their results at a glance.
During testing, two methods were
observed to show an overview of more
than two or three applied filters.
Whichever is chosen, getting the
implementation details right is key to
making sure that users see all filters
without a negative impact on the user
experience.
The first approach to displaying
multiple applied filters on mobile is to
use a horizontal scrolling list. While
this design can work well, care must be
taken to ensure that users know that
some applied filters that might be
hidden. For example, on Wayfair, the
fourth filter is barely visible, so
users might think only three filters are
applied, leading to misunderstandings
about the list scope.
One way to avoid this issue is to
truncate the rightmost filter, so users
can see there are more filters
offscreen.
Also, display the total number of
filters in text above the list to
clarify that not all applied filters are
visible.
Finally, a horizontal scroll bar
reinforces that users can scroll to view
any hidden filters.
On Crutchfield, the heading four applied
filters
not only clarifies to users how many
filters are active, but also indicates
that the fourth filter can be viewed by
scrolling. This, plus the horizontal
scroll bar below the filters, will
encourage users to scroll to see all
four if necessary.
Another option is to stack all applied
filters in multiple rows, keeping them
fully visible without extra user
interaction.
This way, no filters are missed off
screen. However, stacking many filters
can push the product list below the
viewport, which might disorient some
users. In testing, this rarely occurred,
mainly affecting power users who apply
eight or more filters.
As a rule of thumb, spec-heavy sites
should include the filter type along
with the filter option.
Stacked applied filters on HomeDepot
include the filter type next to the
filter option. For example, thread count
200.
Including the filter type can clarify
potential ambiguity, especially with
numeric filter options which could
relate to price dimensions, or in this
case, the thread count of sheets.
These were some of the highlights from
our research findings. We have much more
detailed information on optimizing your
filtering interface, including over 80
product list guidelines in our research
catalog. Go to baymard.com/research
to learn more.